Add docu on how to create widgets (#214)
eclipse-theia/theia-website: src/docs/widgets.md

---
title: Widgets
---

# Widgets

> A widget is a part that will be displayed within the Theia workbench, e.g. a view or an editor. Examples for existing widgets in Theia are the file explorer, the code editor or the problems view. By contributing custom widgets, you can place your own custom UI in a Theia-based application. The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget. Your custom UI will behave the same as other widgets in terms of the window layouting including the title tab, resizing, dragging and opening/closing (see screenshot below). 

Reviewer: > A widget is a part that will be displayed within the Theia workbench

The use of "a part" might be too generic to be meaningful. 

```suggestion
A widget is used to display content within the Theia workbench, e.g. a view or an editor. Examples for existing widgets in Theia are the file explorer, the code editor or the problems view. By contributing custom widgets, you can place your own custom UI in a Theia-based application. The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget. Your custom UI will behave the same as other widgets in terms of the window layouting including the title tab, resizing, dragging and opening/closing (see screenshot below). 
```

Reviewer: > The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget

What do we mean here? It sounds a bit negative?

Author: > > A widget is a part that will be displayed within the Theia workbench
> 
> The use of "a part" might be too generic to be meaningful.

I agree. However, I want to keep "part", as it i well known for Eclipse developers. I combined your suggestion with mine.

Author: > > The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget
> 
> What do we mean here? It sounds a bit negative?

You are right, I just removed the sentence, it is pointless

> A widget is a part that will be displayed within the Theia workbench, e.g. a view or an editor. Examples for existing widgets in Theia are the file explorer, the code editor or the problems view. By contributing custom widgets, you can place your own custom UI in a Theia-based application. The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget. Your custom UI will behave the same as other widgets in terms of the window layouting including the title tab, resizing, dragging and opening/closing (see screenshot below). 

Reviewer: minor:

```suggestion
A widget is a part that will be displayed within the Theia workbench, e.g. a view or an editor. Examples for existing widgets in Theia are the file explorer, the code editor or the problems view. By contributing custom widgets, you can place your own custom UI in a Theia-based application. The Theia workbench provides a frame so that you can embed custom UI into a so-called widget. Your custom UI will behave the same as other widgets in terms of window layouting including the title tab, resizing, dragging and opening/closing (see screenshot below). 
```

<img src="/widget-example.gif" alt="Widget Example" style="max-width: 525px">

Furthermore, a widget will receive events from the surrounding workbench, e.g. on application start, on resize or on detach. The implementation of the actual content of a widget, which is rendered in the provided frame is completely up to you, though. As an example, you can implement some custom UI using React within a widget.

In a nutshell, a widget is a frame to embed some custom (HTML-based) UI into the Theia workbench (see diagram below)

> <img src="/widget-architecture.png" alt="Widget Achitecture" style="max-width: 525px">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="/widget-architecture.png" alt="Widget Architecture" style="max-width: 525px">
```

If you are not yet familiar with contribution points in Theia or the use of dependency injection, please consider this guide on [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

If you would like to have a look at the example code, please use the [Theia extension generator](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension). Install the generator, select the “Widget” example and enter “MyWidget” as a name for the extension.

## Contributing a widget (a view)

Contributing a widget, in our example a view consists of three components:

<ul>
<li>The actual <b>widget</b>, responsible for:
    <ul>
    <li>Setting base parameters, such as an ID, a label and an icon</li>
    <li>Creating the actual UI and its behavior</li>
    <li>Reacting to lifecycle events such as `onUpdateRequest` or `onResize`</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>A <b>widget factory</b>, responsible for instantiating the widget</li>
<li>A <b>widget contribution</b>, responsible for wiring the view with the Theia workbench so that the widget can be opened from within the Theia workbench, e.g. via the views menus</li>

> </ul>

Reviewer: minor: I believe a standard list (non-html) would work here as well and is simpler.

Author: True! However, the rendering of nested lists is apparently broken. I have an item on my TODO list to report this issue, need to create a reproducer. For this reason, I switched to HTML, cause it works.

Author: https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia-website/issues/221

In our example (see code below), we first bind our widget `MyWidget` to itself so that we can instantiate it in our factory using dependency injection. This is not necessarily required for all widgets if they do not use dependency injection inside. We are using dependency injection in our example above to retrieve the message service and for the @postConstruct event. Second, we bind a `WidgetFactory` defining the ID of the widget and the `createWidget` function. This function allows you to control the widget creation, e.g. to pass specific parameters to a custom widget if required. In our simple example, we just use the dependency injection context to instantiate our widget.

**mywidget-frontend-module.ts**
```typescript
bind(MyWidget).toSelf();
bind(WidgetFactory).toDynamicValue(ctx => ({
    id: MyWidget.ID,
    createWidget: () => ctx.container.get<MyWidget>(MyWidget)
})).inSingletonScope();
```

Now you could already open a widget manually via using the widget manager API. However, for most use cases, you want to add a view to the view menu and also provide a respective command. This can be conveniently done using a widget contribution as described in the next section.

> ### Widget Contribution
> Widget contributions allow you to wire a widget into the Theia workbench, more precisely to add them to the view menu and the quick command bar. Theia provides a convenient base class `AbstractViewContribution` to inherit from, which already implements the most common feature set (see example code below). For the initialization, you only need to specify the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Widget Contribution

Widget contributions allow you to wire a widget into the Theia workbench, more precisely to add them to the view menu and the quick command bar. Theia provides a convenient base class `AbstractViewContribution` to inherit from, which already implements the most common feature set (see example code below). For the initialization, you only need to specify the following parameters:
```

> ### Widget Contribution
> Widget contributions allow you to wire a widget into the Theia workbench, more precisely to add them to the view menu and the quick command bar. Theia provides a convenient base class `AbstractViewContribution` to inherit from, which already implements the most common feature set (see example code below). For the initialization, you only need to specify the following parameters:

Reviewer: Should we not aim to provide documentation links when possible? Same is true for other references.

```suggestion
### Widget Contribution

Widget contributions allow you to wire a widget into the Theia workbench, more precisely to add them to the view menu and the quick command bar. Theia provides a convenient base class [`AbstractViewContribution`](https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/classes/core.abstractviewcontribution-2.html) to inherit from, which already implements the most common feature set (see example code below). For the initialization, you only need to specify the following parameters:
```

Author: Hmm, valid point. If we do it, we should do it for all documentation pages to be consistent, right? I am not sure whether this is actually worth the effort, as users could also always search for the type and the links might break. At the moment, we added links if the type doc provide significantly valuable information. I would be in favor to either create a follow up to discuss this for all docs or not do it at all. It feels wrong to start this at one of the documentation pages now only. WDYT?

Author: As discussed in the Dev Meeting, we do not ad these links if there is no explicit reason to do so.

Furthermore, a widget will receive events from the surrounding workbench, e.g. on application start, on resize or on detach. The implementation of the actual content of a widget, which is rendered in the provided frame is completely up to you, though. As an example, you can implement some custom UI using React within a widget.

In a nutshell, a widget is a frame to embed some custom (HTML-based) UI into the Theia workbench (see diagram below)

<img src="/widget-architecture.png" alt="Widget Architecture" style="max-width: 525px">

In this article we will describe how to contribute a custom widget to the Theia workbench. We will focus on a simple view (in contrast to an editor) and use React to implement the UI. 

If you are not yet familiar with contribution points in Theia or the use of dependency injection, please consider this guide on [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

If you would like to have a look at the example code, please use the [Theia extension generator](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension). Install the generator, select the “Widget” example and enter “MyWidget” as a name for the extension.

> ## Contributing a widget (a view)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Contributing a Widget (a View)
```

Contributing a widget, in our example a view consists of three components:

<ul>
<li>The actual <b>widget</b>, responsible for:
    <ul>
    <li>Setting base parameters, such as an ID, a label and an icon</li>
    <li>Creating the actual UI and its behavior</li>
    <li>Reacting to lifecycle events such as `onUpdateRequest` or `onResize`</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>A <b>widget factory</b>, responsible for instantiating the widget</li>
<li>A <b>widget contribution</b>, responsible for wiring the view with the Theia workbench so that the widget can be opened from within the Theia workbench, e.g. via the views menus</li>
</ul>

> ### Implementing a widget

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implementing a Widget
```

<ul>
<li>BaseWidget
    <ul>
    <li><b>ReactWidget</b>
        <ul>
        <li>TreeWidget</li>
        <li>…</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    </ul>
</li>
</ul>

In the following code examples, we use `ReactWidget` as a base class. As shown below, we first initialize the widget with some base parameters:

* `id`: To uniquely identify the widget, e.g. to open it via the WidgetManager.
* `label`: Shown in the tab when the widget is open.
* `caption`: Shown when hovering over the tab when the widget is open.
* `closable`: Whether the user can close the widget (via the “x” in the tab or via right click menu).
* `iconClass`: The icon shown in the tab when the widget is opened.

**mywidget-widget.ts**
```typescript
@injectable()
export class MyWidget extends ReactWidget {

static readonly ID = 'my:widget';
static readonly LABEL = 'My Widget';

@postConstruct()
protected async init(): Promise < void> {
    this.id = MyWidget.ID;
    this.title.label = MyWidget.LABEL;
    this.title.caption = MyWidget.LABEL;
    this.title.closable = true;
    this.title.iconClass = 'fa fa-window-maximize'; // example widget icon.

>     this.update();

Author: In most cases there is no difference between placing statements in the constructor or placing them in a "@postConstruct", as postconstuct is executed directly after the constructor. Therefore you can find both in the Theia codebase. The only exception is if the initialization needs to access a field injection, which would ot work in the constructor.

If you would like to use async/await it's preferable to use "@postConstruct" as the annotated method can be async. When a method is async and doesn't return anything then it's technically a Promise<void>. In this specific case however the "async" doesn't do anything, so we could remove the async and change it to a normal void return type. However the async also doesn't hurt here.

Generally speaking "@postConstruct" is probably preferable over constructors as this offers more flexibility in using the class. Especially it eases testing. If the logic is part of the constructor it can't be avoided or be executed in a controllable manner.

This is what you find often in the Theia codebase in widget classes: A constructor which only contains the configuration options needed for the Widget base class and a "@postConstruct"  containing the whole logic. I guess this is also the reason why it's done this way in the template.

So this does not really refer to the widgets lifecycle, it is more a coding style question. If you think we should generally discuss this, I would like to do it in a separate ticket, please. If we want to get rid of the async, we should also adapt the template.

}
```

When using the respective base class, the implementation of a widget can be really minimal and focussed on the custom UI part. In our example, we just implement the render function that will create our actual custom UI (using JSX/React). The example UI contains a button that will trigger the `displayMessage` function below.

**mywidget-widget.ts**
```typescript
protected render(): React.ReactNode {
    const header = `This is a sample widget which simply calls the messageService in order to display an info message to end users.`;
    return <div id='widget-container'>
              <AlertMessage type='INFO' header={header} />
              <button className='theia-button secondary' title='Display Message' onClick={_a => this.displayMessage()}>Display Message</button>
           </div>
}

@inject(MessageService)

> protected readonly messageService!: MessageService;

Reviewer: Any reason we add the injection later? It does not follow the generator, or general practice.
It might be better to simply add it to the code snippet above instead, or not break up the code for the widget.

Author: Separation of concerns. If we add it above, we need to describe it above, but I think it is better described here in the context of its usage.

Author: OK, this is clearly a matter of taste. I personally prefer the distinct steps (following Thomas argument). At the same time, I would like to stay close to the template when it does not hurt (which I think it does not in this case). Therefore, I consider the current state a good compromise between both directions.

  
protected displayMessage(): void {
    this.messageService.info('Congratulations: My Widget Successfully Created!');
}
```

Please note, that you can override functions of `BaseWidget` or `ReactWidget` to hook into specific life cycle events of a widget, e.g. `onUpdateRequest` or `onResize`. These events are defined by [Phosphor.js](https://phosphorjs.github.io/), the underlying window management framework, see [this documentation](http://phosphorjs.github.io/phosphor/api/widgets/classes/widget.html) about the `Widget` class.

Besides implementing the actual widget, you need to wire it with the Eclipse Theia workbench, which is described in the next two sections.

### Implementing a Widget Factory

Widgets in Theia are instantiated and managed by a central service, the `WidgetManager`. This allows the application to keep track of all created widgets. As an example, the `WidgetManager` supports the function `getOrCreate`, which will either return an existing widget, if it was already created, or create a new one if not.

> To make a custom widget instantiatable by the widget manager, you need to register a `WidgetFactory`.  A widget factory consists of an ID and a function that creates the actual widget. The widget manager will collect all contributed widget factories and pick the correct one for a respective widget by ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make a custom widget instantiatable by the widget manager, you need to register a `WidgetFactory`. A widget factory consists of an ID and a function that creates the actual widget. The widget manager will collect all contributed widget factories and pick the correct one for a respective widget by ID.
```
